HDDS-12928. datanode min free space configuration (#8388)
apache/ozone: hadoop-hdds/docs/content/design/dn-min-space-configuration.md

percent based configuration can be removed.

### Compatibility
If `hdds.datanode.volume.min.free.space.percent` is configured, this should not have any impact
as default value is increased to 20GB which will consider most of the use case.

# Approach 3 Combination of maximum free space and percent configuration on disk size

Configuration:
1. Maximum free space: hdds.datanode.volume.min.free.space: default value `20GB`
2. disk size variation: hdds.datanode.volume.min.free.space.percent: default 10% or 0.1 ratio

Minimum free space = **Min** (`<Max free space>`, `<percent disk space>`)
> Difference with approach `one` is, Min function over the 2 above configuration

| Disk space | Min Free Space (20GB, 10% of disk) |
| -- |------------------------------------|
| 10 GB | 1 GB (=Min(20GB, 1GB)              |
| 100 GB | 10 GB (=Min(20GB, 10GB)            |
| 1 TB | 20 GB   (=Min(20GB, 100GB)         |
| 10 TB | 20 GB (=Min(20GB, 1TB)             |
| 100 TB | 20GB  (=Min(20GB, 10TB)            |

This case is more useful for test environment where disk space is less and no need any additional configuration.

# Conclusion

> 1. Going with Approach 1

Reviewer: Can we add some explanation here, why approach 1 is selected out of 3.

Author: updated

Author: done

---
title: Minimum free space configuration for datanode volumes
summary: Describe proposal for minimum free space configuration which volume must have to function correctly.
date: 2025-05-5
jira: HDDS-12928
status: draft
author: Sumit Agrawal
---
<!--
  Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License");
  you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
  You may obtain a copy of the License at
   http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0
  Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
  distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
  WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
  See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
  limitations under the License. See accompanying LICENSE file.
-->

# Abstract

> Volume in datanode stores the container data and metadata of this is present in volume db.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Volume in the datanode stores the container data and metadata (rocks db co-located on the volume)
```

> There are various parallel operation going on such as import container, export container, write and delete data blocks,

Reviewer 2: Also, rebuilds of EC containers might also be on going. I like @krishnaasawa1's suggestion of bringing
in the container size into the calculation. Maybe `max(min disk space, configured spare container multiple*size per container)`. The default container multiple being 4 (20 gigs)

Author: Above is good opinion, but just considering below with usecase, it will be handled with committed space logic.

When any container operation is going on, it must reserve committed space (ie space is may consume once container is build). With this, need for extra container space may be not be required. 

Will re-check EC container rebuild for committed space or not to fix specific part, And any possibility of crossing min-avaialable space.

Author: Verified, we do increase committed space when create container in recovering state for EC.

> create and delete containers. The space is also required for volume db to perform compaction at regular interval.
> This is hard to capture exact usages and free available space. So, this is required to configure minimum free space

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
container repairs, create and delete containers. The space is also required for volume db to perform compaction at regular interval.
This is hard to capture exact usages and free available space. So, this is required to configure minimum free space
```

- Volume DB size can increase with increase in disk space as container and blocks it can hold can more and hence metadata.
- Volume DB size can also vary due to small files and big files combination, as more small files can lead to more metadata.

Solution involves
- appropriate default min free space
- depends on disk size variation

# Approach 1 Combination of minimum free space and percent increase on disk size

Configuration:
1. Minimum free space: hdds.datanode.volume.min.free.space: default value `10GB`
2. disk size variation: hdds.datanode.volume.min.free.space.percent: default 0.1% or 0.001 ratio

Minimum free space = Max (`<Min free space>`, `<percent disk space>`)

| Disk space | Min Free Space (percent: 1%) | Min Free Space ( percent: 0.1%) |
| -- |------------------------------|---------------------------------|
| 100 GB | 10 GB | 10 GB (min space default)       |
| 1 TB | 10 GB | 10 GB (min space default) |
| 10 TB | 100 GB | 10 GB |
| 100 TB |  1 TB | 100 GB |

considering above table with this solution,
- 0.1 % to be sufficient to hold almost all cases, as not observed any dn volume db to be more that 1-2 GB

# Approach 2 Only minimum free space configuration

> Considering above approach, 10 GB as default should be sufficient for most of the disk, as usually disk size is 10-15TB as seen.

Reviewer 3: Can the default value be in line with container size . Say a user change container size to 20 GB . Then default can  be 2* container size .  But let say someone use 1 GB then 2* container size may not suffice as volume DB can exceed. May be a default of -> container size   + 5 GB (to cover volume DB)

percent based configuration can be removed.

### Compatibility
If `hdds.datanode.volume.min.free.space.percent` is configured, this should not have any impact
as default value is increased to 10GB which will consider most of use case.

# Approach 3 Combination of maximum free space and percent configuration on disk size

Configuration:
1. Maximum free space: hdds.datanode.volume.min.free.space: default value `10GB`
2. disk size variation: hdds.datanode.volume.min.free.space.percent: default 10% or 0.1 ratio

Minimum free space = **Min** (`<Max free space>`, `<percent disk space>`)
> Difference with approach `one` is, Min function over the 2 above configuration

| Disk space | Min Free Space (10GB, 10% of disk) |
| -- |------------------------------------|
| 10 GB | 1 GB (=Min(10GB, 1GB)              |
| 100 GB | 10 GB (=Min(10GB, 10GB)            |
| 1 TB | 10 GB   (=Min(10GB, 100GB)         |
| 10 TB | 10 GB (=Min(10GB, 1TB)             |
| 100 TB | 10GB  (=Min(10GB, 10TB)            |

This case is more useful for test environment where disk space is less and no need any additional configuration.

# To discuss

> 1. From above point, we need increase the minimum disk space configuration to 10 GB as default (earlier 5GB)

Reviewer: It would be better to refer configured container size into the default value calculation of hdds.datanode.volume.min.free.space. Then if user change the default container size, but forget or unaware of change the value of hdds.datanode.volume.min.free.space, the calculation will automatically adjust to get a new value.

Author: ok, will consider Approach 1.

> 2. Weather we need `hdds.datanode.volume.min.free.space.percent` configuration or not. If required, weather approach 1 or approach 3.

Reviewer: 'hdds.datanode.volume.min.free.space.percent' is more adaptive than 'hdds.datanode.volume.min.free.space' in different disk size cases.  My option is we should keep 'hdds.datanode.volume.min.free.space.percent' .

I would favor approach 1, since approach 3 which has a fixed 10GB for all disks bigger than 100GB,  a bit of low configure.

author: Sumit Agrawal
---
<!--
  Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License");
  you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
  You may obtain a copy of the License at
   http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0
  Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
  distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
  WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
  See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
  limitations under the License. See accompanying LICENSE file.
-->

# Abstract
Volume in the datanode stores the container data and metadata (rocks db co-located on the volume).
There are various parallel operation going on such as import container, export container, write and delete data blocks,
container repairs, create and delete containers. The space is also required for volume db to perform compaction at regular interval.
This is hard to capture exact usages and free available space. So, this is required to configure minimum free space
so that datanode operation can perform without any corruption and environment being stuck and support read of data.

> This free space is used to ensure volume allocation if `required space < (volume available space - free space - reserved space)`

Author: will update "committed space" also, missed to add in this documentation.

> This free space is used to ensure volume allocation if `required space < (volume available space - free space - reserved space)`

Author: done

Any container creation and import container need ensure this constrain is met. And block write need ensure that this space is available if new blocks are written.
Note: Any issue related to ensuring free space is tracked with separate JIRA.

> # Existing configuration

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
# Existing configuration (before HDDS-12928)
```

Author: done

> Two configuration is provided,

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Two configurations are provided,
```

Author: done

percent based configuration can be removed.

### Compatibility
If `hdds.datanode.volume.min.free.space.percent` is configured, this should not have any impact
as default value is increased to 20GB which will consider most of the use case.

# Approach 3 Combination of maximum free space and percent configuration on disk size

Configuration:
1. Maximum free space: hdds.datanode.volume.min.free.space: default value `20GB`
2. disk size variation: hdds.datanode.volume.min.free.space.percent: default 10% or 0.1 ratio

Minimum free space = **Min** (`<Max free space>`, `<percent disk space>`)
> Difference with approach `one` is, Min function over the 2 above configuration

| Disk space | Min Free Space (20GB, 10% of disk) |
| -- |------------------------------------|
| 10 GB | 1 GB (=Min(20GB, 1GB)              |
| 100 GB | 10 GB (=Min(20GB, 10GB)            |
| 1 TB | 20 GB   (=Min(20GB, 100GB)         |
| 10 TB | 20 GB (=Min(20GB, 1TB)             |
| 100 TB | 20GB  (=Min(20GB, 10TB)            |

This case is more useful for test environment where disk space is less and no need any additional configuration.

# Conclusion

> 1. Going with Approach 1

Reviewer 5: I think supporting both explicit size and percent is good, but there's a few issues still not addressed:
- Do we only want to support setting one global size for all volumes or supporting individual volume configs?
- If we are adjusting how `hdds.datanode.volume.min.free.space` works, we should also adjust `hdds.datanode.dir.du.reserved` to support configuration in a consistent way.
- It is bad UX to have two different configs (percent and value) for the same thing. The user has no intuition as to what happens when both are configured.
  - Having a `max` function buried in the code to resolve this instead of making them exclusive is even worse.

Probably the most user friendly thing to do is deprecate the percent config keys and have one config that takes either a size or percent based value. Whether we want to continue supporting individual volume mappings in the config is still an open question that needs to be resolved in this proposal.

Reviewer 6: > Using 2 config has been discussed in community meeting, and concluded to have both. Any concern now, need re-discuss over community again.

Community meetings are for synchronous discussion, not definitive decisions.  There are many other forums (mailing list, PRs, Jira, Github discussion).  I think this kind of issue is fine for discussion in PR.  If you are concerned about visibility, please discuss on mailing list.

Author: @errose28 after discussion over community, will go with `Approach 1 `only.
1. purpose of du.reserved config is identifying the disk to be reserved for the application sharing the disk, and hence its at disk level. But here, since its ozone managed space, this needs to be flat configuration. So both need not be same.
2. For simplicity for min.free.space config, its at global level, and may not be required to be disk level similar to reserved.

3. Max of min.free space and percent is done, min.free space represent min threshold for most of the disk ranges, and percent to be if some disk are exceptionally higher size.

Reviewer 5: Let me try to add some guiding principles for config modifications which can help us compare one decision or another. The following are usability issues that can occur with config keys:
1. **Inconsistent config format**: Configs that operate on similar entities (space usage, address + port, percentages) that read those values differently.
2. **Hidden config dependencies**: When one configuration whose value is unchanged functions differently based on the value applied to a different config.
    - This does not include invalid config combinations that fail component startup, since that is easily caught and called out with an error message. We know that no actively running system will have this configuration.

Both `hdds.datanode.du.reserved{.percent}` and `hdds.datanode.min.free.space{.percent}` have issues here, and this is our chance to fix them. Now let's look at how our options either help or hurt the above points.

## Inconsistent config format

`hdds.datanode.du.reserved` and `hdds.datanode.min.free.space` are both used to configure space reservation on datanode drives, so as stated in point 1 it is most intuitive if they accept the same value format. It is ok if one format is more useful for one than another. For example per-volume configuration may be required for `hdds.datanode.du.reserved` but not for `hdds.datanode.min.free.space`. It's still ok for both to have that option because it is not invalid for `hdds.datanode.min.free.space`, there is still only one set of formatting options for users to remember, and only one parser in the code. If we pick and choose different valid formats for each config we will have two formats to remember and two parsers in the code. Therefore even removing allowed config formats from `hdds.datanode.min.free.space` that are still present in `hdds.datanode.du.reserved` actually adds complexity. Based on this `hdds.datanode.du.reserved` and `hdds.datanode.min.free.space` must accept values of the same format to avoid introducing new config usability problems.

## Hidden config dependencies

Next let's look at how the percent variations affect point 2. Anything other than failing startup if the percent and non-percent variations are specified creates this problem, so if a percent and non-percent config key are given like `hdds.datanode.min.free.space.percent` and `hdds.datanode.min.free.space` it must be considered invalid and fail the datanode. 

There is another option though: get rid of the percentage specific *config keys* but still support percentage based configuration with the one `hdds.datanode.min.free.space` config. Let's look at why this works:
- `hdds.datanode.du.reserved` needs to support volume specific configuration in the form of `<volume-path>:reserved-size` since not all volumes may be used as spill for compute, or the volumes may be utilized differently.
    - This means we will always have a parsing method like [VolumeUsage#getReserved](https://github.com/apache/ozone/blob/2a1a6bf124007821eb68779663bbaad371ea668f/hadoop-hdds/container-service/src/main/java/org/apache/hadoop/ozone/container/common/volume/VolumeUsage.java#L195) to handle converting config strings into long values for a volume.
- `hdds.datanode.min.free.space` and `hdds.datanode.du.reserved` should support the same value format, so `hdds.datanode.min.free.space` also needs to use this same parser.
- If we are already need a string parser for both configs, we might as well make it differentiate between percentage and size based configs too.

## Proposal to address all requirements

The following layout meets all the constraints defined above:
- Only two config keys: `hdds.datanode.min.free.space` and `hdds.datanode.du.reserved`
- The valid formats for either config key are:
    - A fixed size, like `20GB`
    - A percentage as a float, like `0.001`. The lack of a unit differentiates it from the first option.
    - A mapping of volumes to sizes, like `/data/hdds1:20GB,/data/hdds2:10GB`
- Only one parser is required for both types of configs.
    - This is not new since a parser is already required and cannot be removed without removing support for per-volume configuration in `hdds.datanode.du.reserved`.

We should never introduce usability issues in our configurations. We have enough of them already : ) If you can show how an alternate proposal meets all the configuration requirements without impacting usability we can consider that as well, but currently none of the proposals in the doc satisfy this.

Author: @errose28 You mean we need have another config for min.free.space?
min.free.space.volumes:/data/hdds1:20GB,/data/hdds2:10GB. -- to be similar to reserve? as similar to du.reserve

I do not feel being in name of similar config for space, we should go with this approach, These are if different purpose. Making similar `just in name of both represent free space` will make configuration complex for min.free.space as user need config for all disk. There is no usecase till not for min.free.space for this.

I do not agree with this approach. In future if there is a need for this for volume mapping for min.free.space, we can ad as separate requirement and handle.

Share your suggestion for this PR if can be merged .....

Reviewer 6: Adding one more to @errose28's list of requirements: cross-compatibility.  When extending the possible values allowed for existing configuration, e.g.:

- adding suffix
- starting to support percentage
- allowing list of items instead of single one

we need to consider that even old version may encounter values understood only by new one, and fail.  (See HDDS-13077 for a specific example.)

In such cases it may be better to deprecate the existing config properties and add new one(s).

Reviewer 5: @sumitagrawl please re-read the **Proposal to address all requirements** section in my reply. I think this very clearly states the proposal but the things you are referring to in your reply are not mentioned there.

> You mean we need have another config for min.free.space?

No, two configs, one for min free space and one for DU reserved that each use the same value schema. I very clearly said in the previous response "Only two config keys: hdds.datanode.min.free.space and hdds.datanode.du.reserved".

> I do not feel being in name of similar config for space, we should go with this approach, These are if different purpose. 

This is your take as developer. You need to look at this from a user's perspective. Our consistent failure to consider this perspective is why the system is difficult to use. Configs representing the same "type" of configuration, be it an address, percentage, disk space, time duration, etc must accept the same types of values. Users are not going to understand the nuance of why two similar configs accept different value formats, and in a few months I probably won't either.

> Making similar just in name of both represent free space will make configuration complex for min.free.space as user need config for all disk.

This is not part of the proposal. Please re-read it. Min space can be configured with one value across all disks, OR it can use a volume mapping.

> There is no usecase till not for min.free.space for this.

Lack of use case is not a valid reason to create a separate value schema for configs that work on the same type. There is also no use case for setting `hdds.heartbeat.interval` to `7d`, but the same value makes perfect sense for `hdds.container.scrub.data.scan.interval`. Yet they use the same value schema because they both represent time intervals. Your suggestion is analogous to rejecting the `d` suffix for `hdds.heartbeat.interval` because it would never be set that long.

@adoroszlai 
> we need to consider that even old version may encounter values understood only by new one, and fail.

We definitely need to formalize our configuration compatibility guarantees. This probably warrants a dedicated discussion somewhere more visible. My initial take is that we should always support "new software old config", but that supporting "old software new config" is not sustainable because it closes our config for extensions. Especially on the server side this would seem like a deployment error. Maybe our client side config compat guarantees would be different from the server.

Author: @errose28 
>No, two configs, one for min free space and one for DU reserved that each use the same value schema

DU reserved is special case carried from Hadoop, for case of disk sharing by other application. This may not be required to have same value Schema. This needs user input over various disk as sharing may differ, so this schema is specialized. They are not of same type.

>This is your take as developer. You need to look at this from a user's perspective. Our consistent failure to consider this perspective is why the system is difficult to use.

From user perspective only, user have no knowledge how to configure the min-free-space, this is more `internal` to Ozone working. 

> volume mapping

This might be additional config can be added later on on need basis. May be we should not add just based on 
intuition, as this may go to be dead config.

Reviewer 2: Per disk configuration is an abomination that stems from needing to run other applications on nodes/drives along with HDFS in the past. It makes sense for the `du` config where essentially we tell the Datanode to spare a few drives. This is very different from the `min` configurations, which has to do with operations and uptime of applications. We **must** keep configurations for `min` same across all drives as it has to do with space for repairs and recovery and nothing to do with configuration of the cluster with regards to co-existing with peer applications. 

I am all for consistency but in this case it implies a capability that I am not sure we wish to implement.
